Yemen's houthis have said they'll carry
on attacking ships in the Red Sea to
protest against Israel's bombardment of
Gaza despite a US decision to return
them to the list of global terrorist
organizations the group's leadership has
condemned Washington's move describing
it as an act of blackmail a Us official
said the redesignation on the specially
designated Global terrorist list or
sdgt would take effect in 30 days to
allow time to Ure sure the measures will
Target houthi members and not the
impoverished people of Yemen the US
stopped short of also declaring the
hou's a foreign terrorist organization
or fto as the state Department's
spokesman explained we decided that the
sdgt designation gave us the tools to
deny the houthi access to the financial
system and gave us the tools to uh
impose additional actions additional
sanctions on anyone who does business
with the the um houthis while minimizing
some of the downstream harm to human
many civilians and the deterrent effect
that we thought the nfto designation
would have on Aid groups well just
before move we move on let's just take a
look at who the houthis are well they're
a political and military group from a
subsect of the country's Shia Muslim
minority the zedis they control a large
part of Yemen most of the population
lives in houthi areas including in the
capital sah its control of the Red Sea
Coastline makes it attacks on commercial
shipping possible the movement formed in
the 1990s against this man the then
yemeni president Ali Abdullah Salah in
the early 2000s they fought a series of
rebellions against Yemen's government
president Salah tried to eliminate the
houthi rebels but failed since 2014 the
houthi movement has been fighting a
civil war against Yemen's government
Iran is accused of supplying weapons to
the houthi something it denies saying it
only supports them politically let's go
live now to our correspondent Tom
baitman who is our state department
correspondent in Washington he was also
our Middle East correspondant up until a
very short time ago Tom hi good to see
you there in Washington so just explain
to us the state Department's decision
here on the houthis and what it will
mean well what they've done is to
redesignate effectively the houthis as a
terrorist organization but it's not as
straightforward as them just putting
them on a list because what you heard
there from Matthew Miller the spokesman
was the kind of designation that they
are using now without getting sort of
Lost In The Weeds of a jumble of uh
letters um he mentioned the uh type that
this is there are effectively two forms
of designation one is a bit tougher than
the other now under the Trump
Administration in its uh Dying Days
president Trump designated the houthis
as a terrorist organization under both
uh of those lists uh one of them
effectively means there can be Criminal
sanctions it would be a crime to provide
material support to the houthis uh so
that's obviously a massive disincentive
and that is why Aid groups in particular
back then in early 2021 were really
worried about this because they thought
it would prevent or make it legally very
difficult for them to provide Aid to
people that need it in houy controlled
areas of Yemen and with the dire
humanitarian conditions there they were
very very worried about the impact So
within a few weeks the Biden
Administration reversed the the Trump
decision um under both of those
designations now what has happened now
is that the Biden Administration has
redesignated the houthis under the sort
of lower level or the slightly less
severe designation and that is the
specially designated Global terrorist
group as opposed to a foreign terrorist
organization I think really uh it got to
a point where the pressure was so great
uh on the administration that they had
to they felt they had to do this
President Biden for example was asked a
couple of days ago by a reporter are the
houthi terrorists he said yes I think it
become inevitable they we going to do
this designation given of course that
they're carrying out Military strikes
against the houthis in Yemen yeah and
what's the view there on that that the
US and the UK are carrying out these
military strikes on houthi Targets in
Yemen to try and stop them from
targeting shipping in the Red Sea many
saying well that's not working those
military strikes have continued and
shipping continues to be affected some
are suggesting that by now introducing
this designation that's a sign that
actually they are recognizing what
they're doing so far isn't working
what's your
view well I don't think so in the sense
that I think the the Des the terrorism
designation would have been in the
pipeline for for quite a while um you
know the big action here is the military
action the terrorism designation I think
official US officials would see this as
a sort of far lower level uh you know
piece of policy or activity uh and and
the reality is it won't have that much
of an impact on the ground as far as the
houthis are concerned because they're
already subject to so many sanctions I
mean um Matt Miller was asked in that
press conference about this and he said
well they hardly have a bank account in
the Bank of New York um uh they're
already subject to a lot of sanctions so
it's largely it's symbolic although it
will'll still come with those concerns
about an impact on humanitarian Aid us
officials are saying there will be what
they call carve outs to ensure they can
still get food and uh medicine in there
as for the impact of the US UK military
activity that's a really good question
because what we've seen since the uh the
The Joint British American strikes on
Thursday was that the houth the houthis
are still firing ballistic missiles at
ships but what we haven't seen is the
scale of attack that we saw in
particular on Tuesday um of last week
that was a sort of swarming attack of
suicide drones ballistic missiles and
cruise missiles I think so far my sense
is US officials feel that this has been
a sort of tactical success they've
degraded a bit of capability for the
houthis they have deterred them to some
extent but that doesn't answer the much
much wider strategic question and that
is now that we have a sort of Battle of
narratives because the houthis are
saying they're trying to get a change of
policy they want to isolate the US they
see it as acting as a diplomatic and
Military shield for the Israelis as they
continue the bombardment on Gaza the
houthis like much of the Arab world want
a ceasefire and an end to The Siege on
Gaza the US and the UK are saying these
things are completely disconnected that
they're just trying to protect
international shipping uh in the Red Sea
but of course all of this uh has you
know a lot of potential to spread and
widen so while the US is trying to deter
the houth they got to walk this very
fine line trying to prevent an
escalation in The Wider region okay Tom
thank you for now